# Hierophone

The Hierophone is an instrument designed around resonating a sheet of metal by placing it in an audio feedback loop. By changing the filtering of the audio, the phase and level of feedback, and manipulating the sheet directly, different overtones and sounds can be generated.

The name derives from ancient Greek, being the combination of ἱερά (hiera, 'holy') and φωνή (phōnē, 'voice'), together meaning "Holy Voice".


## Background

At the beginning of 2025 I visited the home/workshop of [Sam Underwood](https://www.mrunderwood.co.uk/) where he showed a wild range of interesting instruments and oddities he'd designed and made. One of these involved using part of his "Acoustic Modular" to excite a small steel plate with a surface transducer, pick the sound up using a piezo contact microphone, and then feed the output back to the input to make the plate resonate, using a low pass filter and some magnets to influence the sound.

It was great!
So I decided to build my own version.


## Warnings

It is very easy to make a lot of loud, dissonant, screeching noise with the Hierophone. Whilst this is obviously part of the appeal of the instrument, it's worth exercising a bit of caution when first getting used to playing it.

As well as potentially painful sounds, it's also worth pointing out that a thin sheet of steel can have potentially sharp edges and cause damage to tabletops, floors, furniture and hands if you're not careful with it.


## Power

The Hierophone is designed to be run from a 9 volt, centre negative power supply. It should also work fine from 12 volts, but prolonged usage will make the power amp a bit warmer.

## Operation

The signal flow of the Hierophone is relatively simple, with the complexity really coming from the interaction of everything. Whilst it has audio inputs and outputs, it can be played alone with the sounds generated by the plate itself.

TODO! signal flow diagram here

#### Inputs

There are two inputs, both with individual volume controls, which can accept both line-level and modular synth level signals. These are mixed together along with the audio being fed back from the output.

#### Low-cut Filter

It can sometimes be useful to cut some of the low frequencies being fed into the plate to try and make it resonate with higher harmonics. This is a basic 6db/octave, non-resonant, high-pass filter with a variable frequency cut-off from about 350Hz down to 0Hz.

#### Resonant Low-pass Filter

Audio feedback can result in a lot of high frequencies, especially with the steel plate resonance. This filter helps to tame that, as well as allowing some influence over how the plate resonates and what overtones will sound out.

It is a three-pole, 18db/octave, low-pass filter with control over the cut-off frequency and resonance. The cut-off is also CV controllable by another source, with an attenuverter on the input.

#### Power Amplifier

The power amplifier is responsible for driving the surface transducer that excites the plate. The "Plate Drive" controls how much the surface transducer will be driven by the amplifier.

#### Surface Transducer

The transducers

#### High-Gain Piezo Amplifier

An amplifier designed specifically to handle the high output impedance of a piezo contact microphone. The "Pickup Gain" controls how much the input from the piezo is amplified.

#### Feedback Multiplier

When interacting with feedback in complex systems, the phase of the signal can be as important as the magnitude in changing how the system behaves. The multiplier allows smoothly changing both of these things with a single control. Fully clockwise will feed the full signal back to the input, while fully anti-clockwise will still feed the full signal, but inverted to be 180 degrees out of phase.

Positioning the control at 12 o'clock will result in no signal being fed back to the input.

This parameter is also fully CV controllable with an attenuverter on the input. It's worth noting that if you have an external oscillator then the multiplier can function as a ring-modulator, giving access to all sorts of metallic sound generation.

Finally, there is a switch to select whether the audio fed back to the input comes from the piezo amplifier, or instead from the second input before its volume control. This makes it possible to add other equipment into the feedback loop by taking the audio from one of the outputs, passing it through external processing, and then directly back into the multiplier.

#### Outputs

There are two outputs, each with their own separate volume control. These will not function as headphone outputs.


## Playing

Ultimately how you play the Hierophone is up to you, and like anything weird it rewards experimentation. That said, here are a few pointers to help give you some starting directions.

* Cranking the drive, pick-up gain and/or feedback can result in a very noisy experience. This may be what you're going for, but there's a lot of interesting sounds possible when the circuit is just on the edge of fully resonating.
* Manipulating the plate carefully can change the overtones being generated in quite a subtle way. Try bending it while it resonates to see how the sounds changes.
* Touching different points on the plate can also make certain harmonics appear and disappear as the pressure of a finger creates dead spots. If you want to explore this more then it can be useful to prop the plate up on something so it's not laying flat on a table and has more space to vibrate.
* By giving the filter some resonance it can be used to force it to play different overtones. This frequency could then be sequenced from another piece of gear to give movement while the other controls on the instrument are explored.


## Thanks

Sam Underwood for the initial idea.
James Wheale for always supporting the weird stuff I do and getting me to make more of it.
